Tom Curran has been called up to England's Ashes squad. The 22-year-old Surrey all-rounder will fly out to Australia in the next 24 hours as a replacement for Steven Finn, after the Middlesex fast bowler was ruled out of the rest of the tour with a torn left knee cartilage.

Curran is yet to play a Test match for England. However, he broke into the white-ball side during the 2017 season, making his debut in Twenty20 and one-day international cricket, and impressed the England management with his attitude.

Coach Trevor Bayliss is known to be a fan, and so Curran has been preferred to the likes of Liam Plunkett, Tom Helm, George Garton and Mark Wood as England seek to bolster their ailing pace-bowling reserves ahead of the toughest series of them all.

Shape Created with Sketch. England Ashes squad Show all 17 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. England Ashes squad 1/17 Captain: Joe Root England's Mr Dependable will lead his side into an Ashes series for the first time, and while he has the experience of the series wins in 2013 and 2015, he also has the scars of the last trip Down Under. Getty 2/17 Batsman: Alastair Cook The former captain will be crucial to England's hopes, with the Essex opener needing to find the same resilient form that he displayed in Australia in the 2010/11 series. Getty 3/17 Batsman: Mark Stoneman Cook's likely opening partner will be Mark Stoneman after selectors decided to stick with him despite a nervous series against the West Indies. Getty 4/17 Batsman/spinner: Dawid Malan Malan showed glimpses of promise this summer and can also offer an option with the ball, but he is untested on the hard pitches of Australia and could be found out. Getty 5/17 Batsman: Gary Ballance Ballance is handed yet another chance to salvage his England career as the selectors hope he will eventually come good for their unyielding faith. Getty 6/17 Batsman: James Vince Vince is the surprise inclusion in the squad, having done little of note in county cricket since being dropped in 2016. Getty 7/17 Batsman/spinner: Moeen Ali Moeen Ali could easily go on to be man of the series given his ability to deliver fireworks with bat and ball. He may disagree, but he is undoubtedly England's front line spinner. Getty 8/17 Batsman/spinner: Mason Crane Crane is yet to make his full debut, though took a wonderful catch against the West Indies as a substitute fielder and will head to Australia as a back-up leg-break spiner bowler. Getty 9/17 Wicketkeeper: Ben Foakes Foakes will head to Australia as a deputy for first-choice wicketkeeper Jonny Bairstow. Getty 10/17 Wicketkeeper: Jonny Bairstow Another man who will need to produce runs to give England a chance of victory, with his ability in the mid-order giving the tourists a bite throughout the line-up. Getty 11/17 All-rounder: Ben Stokes Stokes is named in the side despite falling under a huge cloud after his arrest on a late night out in Bristol. His future as vice-captain looks very much in doubt. Getty 12/17 All-rounder: Chris Woakes Woakes will provide rest for the front-line bowlers and will also prove handy with the bat. Getty 13/17 Bowler: Stuart Broad Broad has long set his sights on this Ashes tour as he hopes to make up for the 2013/14 humiliation, and his opening partnership with James Anderson will set the tone for how England will cope out in Australia. Getty 14/17 Bowler: James Anderson England's leading Test wicket-taker will be wrapped in cotton wool until the first Test, though he will have to deliver the goods in a country where swing can be hard to find. Getty 15/17 Bowler: Jake Ball Ball could prove to be England's joke in the pack given his extra pace and bounce. Think Chris Tremlett a la 2010/11. It's just a case of keeping him fit. Getty 16/17 Bowler: Craig Overton The third uncapped member of the squad, Overton has been rewarded for a solid season with Somerset. Getty 17/17 Bowler: Tom Curran Called up by England to replace Steven Finn, who had previously been called up due to Ben Stokes' uncertainty. Getty 1/17 Captain: Joe Root England's Mr Dependable will lead his side into an Ashes series for the first time, and while he has the experience of the series wins in 2013 and 2015, he also has the scars of the last trip Down Under. Getty 2/17 Batsman: Alastair Cook The former captain will be crucial to England's hopes, with the