We'll have turkey on the table Thursday but, as yet, it looks like no turkey in the Presidential on-deck circle. And both Gov. Howard Dean and Congressman Bernie Sanders think credit should go where credit is due. That means, thank you, Ralph Nader. Thanks a whole frickin' lot!

Shortly after the votes were counted and the stalemate began, Dean said he hoped the Nader voters in the Sunshine State — all 93,000 — were "happy." Said he hoped they would be comfortable with the Supreme Court justices that Dubya will be appointing if he proves to be the eventual winner. Dean supported Ralph Nader's right to run, but sarcastically expressed the hope that Nader's supporters will live at peace with themselves under the looming Bush administration.

And Sanders, an old friend of the Green Party candidate, was even more upset.

"It seemed to me," said Ol' Bernardo, "that in the last month or two, Nader really made a deliberate effort to defeat Al Gore. He went to those states where the races were closest and was pretty clear about his goal. I don't understand that and I think that was wrong."

Hindsight's always 20-20.

Thanks, Ralph.

Civil-Unions Update — The 11-member commission established by Act 91 met last week at the Statehouse to check up on how Vermont's landmark legalization of love for all couples was shaking out. The news was quite good.

Steve Patterson, deputy commerce secretary, reported no negative repercussions whatsoever to date. While there's plenty of anecdotal information about the positive effect the more than 1200 civil unions have had on Vermont's hospitality sector, Patterson said his agency had compiled no data to quantify that.

Town Clerk Linda Spence of Manchester told the commission over the speakerphone that implementation of the civil-unions law has been remarkably smooth. Vance is also a justice of the peace and the president of the Association of Town Clerks and Treasurers. She was familiar with just one case of rude treatment given an out-of-state lesbian couple by a town official in Weston.

"The sun still rises and sets in Vermont," said Spence. "I myself am a heterosexual, but I have to say my experiences both as town clerk and justice of the peace have been nothing but positive with this law in place. It has proved to me to be one of the most moving and emotional pieces of legislation I have seen, and I don't see where it does any harm to anybody."

We're No.1??? — University of Vermont men's ice hockey Coach Mike Gilligan told Seven Days Tuesday morning he's hanging in there. After all, the guy's a veteran of the game. A senior statesman. An institution.

When Gilligan first hit Burlington, Bernie Sanders was mayor, Madeleine Kunin just got elected governor, Phish was a typo. Nobody ever heard of Bill Clinton. The lakefront bikepath did not exist.

Things change.

That's why we had to check Gilligan's pulse this week. At no time in his 16 years of whistling Vermont line changes has Mike Gilligan been here before. It's uncharted territory. The numbers don't lie. As the old Green & Gold prepared for Tuesday night's game against non-league opponent UMass-Amherst, Vermont is 4-0 and flying solo in first place in the ECAC.

Yeah, yeah, yeah, I know. It's much too early to suggest that Cinderella is spending the winter in Burlington, Vermont. Way too early. Dream on, right?

But they say the darkest hour comes right before the dawn. And everybody remembers the black night that swallowed UVM last season. However, what these guys have been doing on the ice speaks volumes.

"They learned quite a bit last season," Gilligan told Seven Days. "They learned how precious one game is. How precious a night on the ice is."

It shows.

And make no mistake, this is a disciplined team in more ways than one. Gilligan told us forward Graham Mink, a junior from Stowe, Vermont, sat out the first four games as punishment for breaking an undisclosed team rule. When he finally got to play in the Yale game, Big Mink played like a gorilla on ice skates.

A couple of Minnesota schools are coming in this weekend for a Saturday-Sunday tournament at the Gut with Gilligan's Gorillas and UNH. Duluth and Mankato, in the giant Minnesota state university system, will hit Burlap with some rock-'em-sock-'em "western-style" hockey. Welcome to Vermont, boys!

Media Notes — Is there Mardi Gras coverage in Sera Congi's future?

Congi is the talented co-anchor of "Vermont's Own" Ch. 3